# Crime Association Rules Learning in the City of Atlanta

## Abstract 

Data mining and machine learning have become a vital part of crime detection and prevention.Crime in Atlanta, Georgia is above the national median and has been a major problem for the city since the middle twentieth century. Today,the overall crime rate is 78 percent higher than the average of crimes committed in Georgia. It is also 107 percent higher than the national average. When we compare the violent crimes happening in Atlanta with the rest of the state, it is 162 percent higher. Compared to the national average, the rate of violent crimes is 138 percent higher. This makes it very unsafe to be a citizen in Atlanta. The state police department is trying to combat the situation, but lack enough personnel to patrol around the city at all times.

## Introduction 

The main motivation for our project was how easily the crime data could be available form credible sources. This was a big plus as we then could develop any kind of system to assist the city officials. In the past, due to inadequate data collection and surveillance techniques, it was difficult to recognize a pattern to these daily crimes, much less apprehend the criminals behind these violations. As mentioned earlier, now we have access to data that is produced every second of everyday. On top of that, there is a systematic way of recording and storing these data so as not to tamper with it or loose it. Aggregation of all the collected data facilitates a more accurate pattern analysis of all the crime types. This would in turn assist the police department to be able to prevent the predicted crimes and also be able to set patrols in the areas highly affected with crimes. Criminal victimization is a relatively rare event that is, in any given reference period, most respondents do not report victimization. Very large general population samples are therefore to be required to accurately characterize the population of offenders and victims, and therefore detailed subgroup analyses were problematic in the last decades before the big data time coming. The searcher during that time also lacked enough data to make an accurate prediction in criminal events in these big cities. Now, we have explosive data being produced every second, and systematic recording and collection methods like public cameras, personal cell phones, electronic devices in police vehicles, etc. make numerous dataset, which is able to promote accurate prediction into reality. All these collected data can help us understand more about the crimes in the city and help us better understand our living, working and studying environment in cities, in this case, Atlanta city. By analyzing data in a mathematically way, the researcher can gain access into the deep reasons behind the causes of crime and be able to predict future crimes before their occurrence.

## Proposed work 

The Projects main aim was to be able to analyze the crimes happening all around in Atlanta and be able to form an association as to where and when certain types of crimes normally happen. The project can form association rules between the time of the crime reported, the location of the crime and the type of crime that happened. This enables us to discover a pattern of the crime and may help users take precaution measures to avoid it. Some of the crimes that seem common are in fact something the users could have avoided, if the patterns of the crimes are studied. The criminals usually tend to follow a certain pattern when doing a crime, like the locations where the crime happened or the time during which the crimes happens. Studying and analyzing the patterns can help the citizens of that city be a step ahead and try preventing it from happening. The visualizations developed would be able to translate the results achieved. They would be able to better show the
changes in the data.
